What Is Physics? 
Science and engineering are based on measurements and comparisons.Thus,we need rules about how things are measured and compared, and we need experiments to establish the units for those measurements and comparisons.One purpose of physics (and engineering) is to design and conduct those experiments. For example,physicists strive to develop clocks of extreme accuracy so that any time or time interval can be precisely determined and compared.You may wonder whether such accuracy is actually needed or worth the effort.Here is oneexample of the worth: Without clocks of extreme accuracy, the Global Positioning System (GPS) that is now vital to worldwide navigation would beuseless.

Measuring Things 
We discover physics by learning how to measure the quantities involved in physics. Among these quantities are length, time, mass, temperature, pressure, and electric current. We measure each physical quantity in its own units, by comparison with a standard.The unit is a unique name we assign to measures of that quantity—for example,meter (m) for the quantity length.The standard corresponds to exactly 1.0 unit of the quantity.As you will see,the standard for length,which corresponds
to exactly 1.0 m, is the distance traveled by light in a vacuum during a certain fraction of a second.We can define a unit and its standard in any way we care to. However,the important thing is to do so in such a way that scientists around the world will agree that our definitions are both sensible and practical. Once we have set up a standard—say,for length—we must work out procedures by which any length whatever, be it the radius of a hydrogen atom, the wheelbase of a skateboard,or the distance to a star,can be expressed in terms of the standard. Rulers, which approximate our length standard, give us one such procedure for measuring length. However, many of our comparisons must be indirect.You cannot use a ruler, for example, to measure the radius of an atom orthe distance to a star. Base Quantities. There are so many physical quantities that it is a problem to organize them.Fortunately,they are not all independent;for example,speed is the ratio of a length to a time.Thus, what we do is pick out—by international agreement—a small number of physical quantities, such as length and time, and assign standards to them alone.We then define all other physical quantities in terms of thesebase quantities and their standards (called base standards).Speed,for example, is defined in terms of the base quantities length and time and their basestandards. Base standards must be both accessible and invariable. If we define the length standard as the distance between one’s nose and the index finger on an outstretched arm,we certainly have an accessible standard—but it will,of course, vary from person to person.The demand for precision in science and engineering pushes us to aim first for invariability.We then exert great effort to make duplicates of the base standards that are accessible to those who need
them.

The International System of Units
In 1971, the 14th General Conference on Weights and Measures picked seven quantities as base quantities, thereby forming the basis of the International System of Units, abbreviated SI from its French name and popularly known as themetric system.Table 1-1 shows the units for the three base quantities—length, mass,and time—that we use in the early chapters of this book.These units were defined to be on a “human scale.” Many SI derived units are defined in terms of these base units.For example, the SI unit for power, called the watt (W), is defined in terms of the base units formass,length,and time.Thus,as you will see in Chapter 7, 

where the last collection of unit symbols is read as kilogram-meter squared per second cubed. To express the very large and very small quantities we often run into in physics,we use scientific notation,which employs powers of 10.In this notation,

Scientific notation on computers sometimes takes on an even briefer look,as in 3.56 E9 and 4.92 E–7,where E stands for “exponent of ten.”It is briefer still on some calculators,where E is replaced with an empty space. As a further convenience when dealing with very large or very small measurements, we use the prefixes listed in Table 1-2. As you can see, each prefix represents a certain power of 10,to be used as a multiplication factor.Attaching a prefix to an SI unit has the effect of multiplying by the associated factor.Thus, we can express a particular electric power as 

Some prefixes, as used in milliliter, centimeter, kilogram, and megabyte, are probably familiar to you.

Changing Units 
We often need to change the units in which a physical quantity is expressed.We do so by a method called chain-link conversion.In this method,we multiply the original measurement by a conversion factor (a ratio of units that is equal to unity).For example,because 1 min and 60 s are identical time intervals,we have

Thus, the ratios (1 min)/(60 s) and (60 s)/(1 min) can be used as conversion factors.This is not the same as writing or 60 " 1;each number and its unit must be treated together. Because multiplying any quantity by unity leaves the quantity unchanged,we can introduce conversion factors wherever we find them useful. In chain-link conversion,we use the factors to cancel unwanted units.For example,to convert 2 min to seconds,we have

If you introduce a conversion factor in such a way that unwanted units do not cancel, invert the factor and try again. In conversions, the units obey the same algebraic rules as variables and numbers. Appendix D gives conversion factors between SI and other systems of units, including non-SI units still used in the United States. However, the conversion factors are written in the style of “1 min " 60 s” rather than as a ratio. So, you need to decide on the numerator and denominator in any needed ratio.

Length
In 1792, the newborn Republic of France established a new system of weights and measures.Its cornerstone was the meter,defined to be one ten-millionth of the distance from the north pole to the equator.Later,for practical reasons,this Earth standard was abandoned and the meter came to be defined as the distance between two fine lines engraved near the ends of a platinum–iridium bar, the standard meter bar,which was kept at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris.Accurate copies of the bar were sent to standardizing laboratories throughout the world.These secondary standards were used to produce other, still more accessible standards, so that ultimately every measuring device derived its authority from the standard meter bar through a complicated chain ofcomparisons. Eventually, a standard more precise than the distance between two fine scratches on a metal bar was required. In 1960, a new standard for the meter, based on the wavelength of light,was adopted.Specifically,the standard for the meter was redefined to be 1 650 763.73 wavelengths of a particular orange-red light emitted by atoms of krypton-86 (aparticular isotope,or type,of krypton) in a gas discharge tube that can be set up anywhere in the world. This awkward number of wavelengths was chosen so that the new standard would be close to the old meter-bar standard.

By 1983, however, the demand for higher precision had reached such a point that even the krypton-86 standard could not meet it,and in that year a bold step was taken.The meter was redefined as the distance traveled by light in a specified time interval.In the words of the 17th General Conference on Weights and Measures:

This time interval was chosen so that the speed of light cis exactly
c " 299 792 458 m/s.

Measurements of the speed of light had become extremely precise, so it made sense to adopt the speed of light as a defined quantity and to use it to redefine themeter. Table 1-3 shows a wide range of lengths,from that of the universe (top line) to those of some very small objects.

Significant Figures and Decimal Places
Suppose that you work out a problem in which each value consists of two digits. Those digits are called significant figures and they set the number of digits that you can use in reporting your final answer. With data given in two significant figures, your final answer should have only two significant figures. However, depending on the mode setting of your calculator, many more digits might be displayed.Those extra digits are meaningless. In this book,final results of calculations are often rounded to match the least number of significant figures in the given data. (However, sometimes an extra significant figure is kept.) When the leftmost of the digits to be discarded is 5 or more, the last remaining digit is rounded up; otherwise it is retained as is. For example, 11.3516 is rounded to three significant figures as 11.4 and 11.3279 is rounded to three significant figures as 11.3.(The answers to sample problems in this book are usually presented with the symbol " instead of % even if rounding is involved.) When a number such as 3.15 or 3.15 '103 is provided in a problem,the number of significant figures is apparent, but how about the number 3000? Is it known to only one significant figure (3 ' 103)? Or is it known to as many as four significant figures (3.000 ' 103)? In this book,we assume that all the zeros in such given numbers as 3000 are significant,but you had better not make that assumption elsewhere. Don’t confuse significant figures with decimal places. Consider the lengths 35.6 mm, 3.56 m, and 0.00356 m.They all have three significant figures but they have one,two,and five decimal places,respectively.



Time
Time has two aspects. For civil and some scientific purposes, we want to know the time of day so that we can order events in sequence.In much scientific work, we want to know how long an event lasts.Thus,any time standard must be able to answer two questions: “When did it happen?” and “What is its duration?” Table1-4 shows some time intervals. Any phenomenon that repeats itself is a possible time standard. Earth’s rotation, which determines the length of the day, has been used in this way for centuries; Fig. 1-1 shows one novel example of a watch based on that rotation. A quartz clock, in which a quartz ring is made to vibrate continuously, can be calibrated against Earth’s rotation via astronomical observations and used to measure time intervals in the laboratory. However, the calibration cannot be carried out with the accuracy called for by modern scientific and engineering technology.

To meet the need for a better time standard, atomic clocks have been developed. An atomic clock at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in Boulder, Colorado, is the standard for Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) in the United States.Its time signals are available by shortwave radio (stations WWV and WWVH) and by telephone (303-499-7111).Time signals (and related information) are also available from the United States Naval Observatory at website http://tycho.usno.navy.mil/time.html.(To set a clock extremely accurately at your particular location,you would have to account for the travel time required for these signals to reach you.) Figure 1-2 shows variations in the length of one day on Earth over a 4-year period, as determined by comparison with a cesium (atomic) clock. Because the variation displayed by Fig. 1-2 is seasonal and repetitious,we suspect the rotating Earth when there is a difference between Earth and atom as timekeepers.The variation is due to tidal effects caused by the Moon and to large-scale winds. The 13th General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1967 adopted astandard second based on the cesium clock:

Atomic clocks are so consistent that,in principle,two cesium clocks would have to run for 6000 years before their readings would differ by more than 1s.Even such accuracy pales in comparison with that of clocks currently being developed;their precision may be 1 part in 1018—that is,1s in 1' 1018 s (which is about 3'1010 y).

Mass 
The Standard Kilogram The SI standard of mass is a cylinder of platinum and iridium (Fig.1-3) that is kept at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris and assigned,by international agreement, a mass of 1 kilogram.Accurate copies have been sent to standardizing laboratories in other countries, and the masses of other bodies can be determined by balancing them against a copy. Table 1-5 shows some masses expressed in kilograms,ranging over about 83 orders of magnitude. The U.S. copy of the standard kilogram is housed in a vault at NIST. It is removed, no more than once a year, for the purpose of checking duplicate copies that are used elsewhere.Since 1889,it has been taken to France twice for recomparison with the primary standard.

A Second Mass Standard
The masses of atoms can be compared with one another more precisely than they can be compared with the standard kilogram. For this reason, we have a second mass standard.It is the carbon-12 atom,which,by international agreement,has been assigned a mass of 12 atomic mass units(u).The relation between the two units is with an uncertainty of %10 in the last two decimal places. Scientists can, with reasonable precision, experimentally determine the masses of other atoms relative to the mass of carbon-12. What we presently lack is a reliable means of extending that precision to more common units of mass,such as a kilogram.

Density 
As we shall discuss further in Chapter 14,density r (lowercase Greek letter rho) is the mass per unit volume:


Densities are typically listed in kilograms per cubic meter or grams per cubic centimeter.The density of water (1.00 gram per cubic centimeter) is often used as a comparison.Fresh snow has about 10% of that density;platinum has a density that is about 21 times that of water.
end of page 7

start of page 13
Motion Along a Straight Line
What Is Physics? One purpose of physics is to study the motion of objects—how fast they move,for example,and how far they move in a given amount of time.NASCAR engineers are fanatical about this aspect of physics as they determine the performance of their cars before and during a race. Geologists use this physics to measure tectonic-plate motion as they attempt to predict earthquakes. Medical researchers need this physics to map the blood flow through a patient when diagnosing a partially closed artery, and motorists use it to determine how they might slow sufficiently when their radar detector sounds a warning. There are countless other examples. In this chapter, we study the basic physics of motion where the object (race car,tectonic plate,blood cell,or any other object) moves along a single axis.Such motion is called one-dimensional motion.

Motion 
The world,and everything in it,moves.Even seemingly stationary things,such as a roadway,move with Earth’s rotation,Earth’s orbit around the Sun,the Sun’s orbit around the center of the Milky Way galaxy,and that galaxy’s migration relative to other galaxies.The classification and comparison of motions (called kinematics) is often challenging.What exactly do you measure,and how do you compare? Before we attempt an answer, we shall examine some general properties of motion that is restricted in three ways. 1. The motion is along a straight line only.The line may be vertical,horizontal,or slanted,but it must be straight. 2. Forces (pushes and pulls) cause motion but will not be discussed until Chapter 5.In this chapter we discuss only the motion itself and changes in the motion. Does the moving object speed up, slow down, stop, or reverse direction? If the motion does change,how is time involved in the change? 3. The moving object is either a particle (by which we mean a point-like object such as an electron) or an object that moves like a particle (such that every portion moves in the same direction and at the same rate).A stiff pig slipping down a straight playground slide might be considered to be moving like a particle;however,a tumbling tumbleweed would not.


Position and Displacement
To locate an object means to find its position relative to some reference point,often the origin (or zero point) of an axis such as the x axis in Fig.2-1.The positive directionof the axis is in the direction of increasing numbers (coordinates),which is to the right in Fig.2-1.The opposite is the negative direction. For example,a particle might be located at x " 5 m,which means it is 5 m in the positive direction from the origin.If it were at x "$5 m,it would be just as far from the origin but in the opposite direction. On the axis, a coordinate of $5 m is less than a coordinate of $1 m, and both coordinates are less than a coordinate of #5 m.A plus sign for a coordinate need not be shown,but a minus sign must always be shown. A change from position x1 to position x2 is called a displacement-x,where (The symbol -, the Greek uppercase delta, represents a change in a quantity, and it means the final value of that quantity minus the initial value.) When numbers are inserted for the position values x1 andx2 in Eq.2-1,a displacement in the positive direction (to the right in Fig.2-1) always comes out positive,and a displacement in the opposite direction (left in the figure) always comes out negative. For example, if the particle moves from x1 " 5 m to x2 " 12 m, then the displacement is -x " (12 m) $ (5 m) "#7 m.The positive result indicates that the motion is in the positive direction.If,instead,the particle moves from x1 " 5 m to x2 " 1 m,then -x " (1 m) $ (5 m) "$4 m.The negative result indicates that the motion is in the negative direction. The actual number of meters covered for a trip is irrelevant;displacement involves only the original and final positions. For example, if the particle moves from x " 5 m out to x " 200 m and then back to x " 5 m,the displacement from start to finish is -x " (5 m) $ (5 m) " 0. Signs. A plus sign for a displacement need not be shown, but a minus sign must always be shown.If we ignore the sign (and thus the direction) of a displacement,we are left with the magnitude(or absolute value) of the displacement.For example,a displacement of -x"$4 m has a magnitude of 4 m.

Displacement is an example of a vector quantity,which is a quantity that has both a direction and a magnitude.We explore vectors more fully in Chapter 3,but here all we need is the idea that displacement has two features:(1) Its magnitude is the distance (such as the number of meters) between the original and final positions.(2) Its direction,from an original position to a final position,can be represented by a plus sign or a minus sign if the motion is along a single axis. Here is the first of many checkpoints where you can check your understanding with a bit of reasoning. The answers are in the back of the book.

Average Velocity and Average Speed
A compact way to describe position is with a graph of position xplotted as a function of time t—a graph of x(t).The notation x(t) represents a function x of t,not the product x times t.) As a simple example,Fig.2-2 shows the position function x(t) for a stationary armadillo (which we treat as a particle) over a 7 s time interval.The animal’s position stays at x "$2 m. Figure 2-3 is more interesting, because it involves motion.The armadillo is apparently first noticed at t " 0 when it is at the position x "$5 m. It moves toward x " 0,passes through that point at t " 3 s,and then moves on to increasingly larger positive values of x.Figure 2-3 also depicts the straight-line motion of the armadillo (at three times) and is something like what you would see. The graph in Fig.2-3 is more abstract,but it reveals how fast the armadillo moves. Actually,several quantities are associated with the phrase “how fast.”One of them is the average velocity vavg, which is the ratio of the displacement -x that occurs during a particular time interval -tto that interval:

The notation means that the position is x1 at time t1 and then x2 at time t2.Acommon unit for vavg is the meter per second (m/s).You may see other units in the problems,but they are always in the form of length/time. Graphs. On a graph of x versus t, vavg is the slope of the straight line that connects two particular points on the x(t) curve:one is the point that corresponds tox2 andt2,and the other is the point that corresponds to x1 andt1.Like displacement, vavg has both magnitude and direction (it is another vector quantity). Its magnitude is the magnitude of the line’s slope.A positive vavg (and slope) tells us that the line slants upward to the right;a negative vavg (and slope) tells us that the line slants downward to the right.The average velocity vavg always has the same sign as the displacement -xbecause-tin Eq.2-2 is always positive. Figure 2-4 shows how to find vavg in Fig.2-3 for the time interval t"1s to t"4s. We draw the straight line that connects the point on the position curve at the beginning of the interval and the point on the curve at the end of the interval.Then we find the slope -x/-tof the straight line.For the given time interval,the average velocity is

Average speed savg is a different way of describing “how fast” a particle moves.Whereas the average velocity involves the particle’s displacement -x,the average speed involves the total distance covered (for example, the number of meters moved),independent of direction;that is,

Because average speed does not include direction, it lacks any algebraic sign. Sometimessavg is the same (except for the absence of a sign) as vavg.However,the two can be quite different.

end of page 16

start of page 18

Instantaneous Velocity and Speed
You have now seen two ways to describe how fast something moves: average velocity and average speed,both of which are measured over a time interval -t. However, the phrase “how fast” more commonly refers to how fast a particle is moving at a given instant—its instantaneous velocity(or simply velocity)v. The velocity at any instant is obtained from the average velocity by shrinking the time interval -t closer and closer to 0.As -t dwindles,the average velocity approaches a limiting value,which is the velocity at that instant:

Note that vis the rate at which  position xis changing with time at a given instant; that is,v is the derivative of x with respect to t.Also note that v at any instant is the slope of the position–time curve at the point representing that instant. Velocity is another vector quantity and thus has an associated direction. Speed is the magnitude of velocity; that is, speed is velocity that has been stripped of any indication of direction, either in words or via an algebraic sign. (Caution: Speed and average speed can be quite different.) A velocity of #5 m/s and one of $5 m/s both have an associated speed of 5 m/s.The speedometer in a car measures speed,not velocity (it cannot determine the direction).

end of page 18 












